I've proven how helpful EMDR can be for
pgsc and depression why and how well
trauma is a be living and whatever
you're feeling is real as opposed to
feeling like a memory but in our
research you discovered that if you move
your eyes back and forth as you recall a
traumatic experience your brain is able
to say this is what happened to me in
the past and 78% of the people we
studied who had adult in time were
completely cured can you do it on me
good what do you you see vessel Vander
kulk has been described as maybe the
most most influential psychiatrist of
the 21st century and for over 40 years
his clinical research has revolutionized
how we understand trauma and its impact
on our brain and body your Early
Childhood experiences create who you are
and how many of the people that you
treated in your practice have childhood
trauma about 90% And it's very difficult
to change are they changeable yes that
is the great news but the problem is the
focus is not on helping people the
focuses on funding successful Financial
organizations and even though was the
first person who started yoga for pdsd
which was very effective and then
there's psych development and neuro
feedback Weir our results were stunning
people are so conformists we already
know the ansers let not explore anything
new but let's do the science and see how
itse works if for home and what about
psychedelic therapy It's very effective
have you ever done a psychedelic truck
yeah of course what did you learn that
my quest for Al understanding trauma had
to do with my own childhood trauma all
the pain your suffering earlier on I
asked if people could heal from their
trauma have you healed from yours
this has always blown my mind a little
bit 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show so could I ask you for a favor
before we start if you like the show and
you like what we do here and you want to
support us the free simple way that you
can do just that is by hitting the
Subscribe button and my commitment to
you is if you do that then I'll do
everything in my power me and my team to
make sure that this show is better for
you every single week we'll listen to
your feedback we'll find the guest that
you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do thank you so
much
Dr Bessel
vanderock you've been described as maybe
the most influential psychiatrist of the
21st century by the financial
times what is the mission you've spent
your life
pursuing I have been interested in how
people survive extreme
situations how people
can uh overcome the history of people
doing terrible things to each other and
how we can create a better world in that
regard actually so so the the mission
has been rather social but the
investigation has be very much based on
what we learning about brain science
what we learning about psychological
functioning etc etc and this word trauma
seems to be Central to your work and
when I looked before this conversation
at the rise in the use of this word
online and people searching this word
it's pretty staggering what I found
there's this graph that shows a huge
jump and people using the word trauma
what is your view on the subject matter
of trauma specifically how we've
misunderstood what it
is well there has been Evolution which
is quite striking and when I when I
first started to study trauma I was on
the research floor at
Harvard um and my colleagues said why
are you studying trauma Bessel when you
croak nobody ever talk about trauma
again like it is a completely alien
subject um and now everybody talks
everything is a trauma and so from being
non-existent has become a total
explanatory mode as so we have gone as
we always do from one extreme to the
other and my primary interest these days
is not so much into trauma trauma
started it but somewhere along the line
I got to realize that trauma is to a
large degree a breakdown of connection
between human beings and synchronicity
between other human beings and these
days I'm much more focused on how we can
help people establish a relationship to
themselves and to the people around them
when people are suffering from some kind
of psychological disorder whether it's
depression anxiety um
PTSD what is it that you disagree with
with with the traditional view of how to
treat them people are being taught
methods that they say can cure people in
eight sessions which they count and so
there still is there's what people learn
in school these days although no good CL
I know actually practices that is to
help people thinking out to straighten
out people's thinking and to make them
not think these crazy thoughts like and
um that really is no evidence that can
do that is that cognitive behavioral
therapy yeah yeah yeah cognitive
restructuring s of thing or you get
people better by blasting them with
trauma and then before long they get
desensitized with trauma and they see
both of these methods are just they
don't get it that completely doesn't get
the issue at hand actually why I cannot
talk into being a reasonable person
people are not reasonable people and
Trauma is as unreasonable as she can be
that's really at the core
if you understand trauma is that your
brain and perceptual system gets rewired
so you see
things almost entirely through the life
the past experience rather than current
experience okay so if I've if I'm
traumatized talking about my trauma
doesn't necessarily fix my trauma trauma
is a speechless experience so we did the
first neuroimaging study about people
reliving their trauma and we saw that
the entire cognitive part of the brain
disappears that when you're in your
trauma you're just one ball of emotion
and there's no thinking so you're you're
confused you're befuddled it is uh as
Shakespeare says you you suffer from
speechless Terror you become dumbfounded
so the whole traumatic experience is
just beyond belief and so you stay in a
state of confusion and agitation and
then finding language for yourself in
this point is terribly important to help
you to begin to organize your
relationship to yourself it's not enough
but it's but language and the finding
your in experience is terribly important
the word tumor as you say has been
thrown around a lot um and it's become a
bit of a cultural joke to some people
when you say you know something happens
to you you go oh I feel triggered um I'm
traumatized Etc what actually does count
as trauma trauma really is an
overwhelming experience of oh my
god when something happens and you're
completely
helpless and there's nothing in you that
knows how to deal with it people talk a
lot about small tea trauma and Big T
trauma fan of that okay so explain why
not uh well
this you need to be more accurate the
but but the small t t is is very real
trauma when your environment about you
doesn't acknowledge Your Existence most
people for example after natural
disasters do very well because people
get together after natural disas I've
seen it we have a cabin in Northern
fromal we have had terrible floods the
neighbors get together they help each
other and you get a sense of cohesion
actually and a sense of meaning we're
doing this together the small T traumas
have to do with um not acknowledging
that what's going on with you
saying to kids stop crying I'll give you
something to cry about no you don't
matter no actually your dad is a drunk
because you are such a difficult kid
that your father was doing okay until
you came into this family and you must
were too much for him and you caus him
to be the person that to is so it's I
think that's people may small te trauma
it's relational trauma which is a very
big deal for most of the people I get to
see in my
practice most people come in not because
of big te traumas it is because nobody
saw me nobody heard me um I was
relevant um we always had to take care
of my mom or my dad uh but there was no
room for us so if you get fired from
your job and it's a traumatic event yeah
um for you because you you get I don't
know you get you lose your friends you
lose the job your parents are
embarrassed about you can that become
trauma something like that yes you could
depending on how you define and for some
people it does and for some people it
doesn't you know um depends again on the
context uh for some people you get fired
you go like well I didn't like those
[__] anyway or um I I asked this
because I'm I'm wondering if there's a
lot of people listening now that I'm
trying to understand if they small
experience which other people think is
Trivial actually could have resulted in
some kind of deeper trauma response
absolutely at the end the issue is the
perception your perception your
perception the issue is not the event
itself you and I may have the same
events happening and for me it reminds
me about my brother torturing me or it
reminds me about my mom being sick and
not paying attention to you or whatever
and for me it becomes a very big deal
and for you it goes like yeah you know
but I have so many talents why not try
something else and can you give me an
overview of the work you've done in your
life that have fed into all of the
knowledge and information that you have
just for anyone that might not know who
you are yeah what is that sort of body
of work I had a very good psychiatric
training um in one of the Harvard
hospitals and then I was I been the last
state mental hospital in Boston which is
also interesting um I it was this
Sanctuary for very disturbed people and
so that instiution gets closed I go work
at the Veterans Administration hospital
um I met these guys who were people who
I looked up to they were good athletes
competent people helicopter Pilots all
my age and these guys had broken apart
and they had fallen apart they go oh and
they reminded me of some of my relatives
who I grew up with who also had been
concentration surv and Japanese Camp
survivors and then I learned much else
after that but that really opened up my
eyes to that that people can be broken
by life experiences and that really
intrigued me tremendously this is
Central to your story is this early
experience you said earlier that you you
were born in 1943 1943 very important
when you're born has a huge inflict on
who you become so my earliest imprint is
of my father at some point was detained
by the Germans he was not in cration
Camp but he was supposed to go off there
my mom is by herself raising small kids
in hiding right next to the place where
the Nazis are launching their Rockets to
go to London so half of the Rockets fell
into our backyard and you I have no
conscious imprint of that but uh I grew
up like a kid going up in Ukraine today
um and uh a lot of kids my age died I
was a very sickly child there was a low
of hunger and misery half my generation
died of starvation and so I grew up with
Incredible
preconscious imprint of what gets in
Ukraine and Gaza are going through right
now um and that must have left a trace
in my curiosity and my being including a
trace of having a body that was very
sickly you were born in 1943 in see
occupied Netherlands Netherlands okay
and you the middle children of five
that's right y you were very sick as a
child yeah what were your parents like
in terms of love affection all those
kinds of things my mother was more or
less broken by the pandemic of 1919 in
which her father developed parkinsonism
and became one of those all of sax type
people so my mother was a very frozen
person um which had a very impact on me
my father was very conscientious
loving you described your mother as
being a frozen person yeah and it had an
impact on you yeah having a frozen
mother has an impact on you what was
that impact the impact is that if you
have a mother who is not available to
love you and care for you that that
becomes part of your perception of the
world and that means that uh there's a
lot of work to be done about learning
about affection and intimacy and uh
closeness and vulnerability and all
those sort things yeah yeah your mother
would faint whenever Bessel would ask
her what her life was like when she was
a little girl no no I asked her only
once um I was already a junior professor
at Harvard had two kids and my parents
came to visit me and here's an example
of but parents I had I left at age 18
for the us because I wanted so distance
between me and my
parents 10 15 years later quite a few I
wrote to my parents said it's customary
for parents to come and visit their
children sometimes we should be
interested in coming to visit me that
never crossed our
mind and so they came and we actually
had a very blessing time very civilized
and so in the last day my parents were
visiting us I said to my parents you
know you probably don't really know what
I do for a living but a lot of my work
has to do with
incest
and I wonder where does that come from
and I turned towards my mom and I said
you know I wonder if something happened
to you that I picked up that you were
were you ever sexually abused and my mom
fainted fell off her chair and my father
said look what you did to your mother
and my dead wife and her my father
carried my mother into a rebell so I
don't know if my mother was sexually
abused she just fainted when I asked the
question yeah but that's how it goes H
you barely get a straight answer to any
of these things you said that child
abuse and neglect is the single most
preventable cause of mental illness the
single most common cause of drug and
alcohol abuse and a significant
contributor to leading causes of death
such as diabetes heart disease cancer
stroke and suicide that's true and in
your book you say that ating child abuse
in America would reduce the overall rate
of depression by more than half
alcoholism by 2/3 and suicide drug use
and domestic violence by three quarters
yeah that doesn't come from me there a
data from this very big CDC study uh
done by Vincent fer and so these a DAT
on 25 25,000 people yeah yeah people
have got increasingly interested in
their Early Childhood experiences as a
lens to understand who they are as
adults yeah is that overblown or is it
important to understand it's not
overblown to be curious about how you
became who you became and what the
internal ingredients of your cake are I
think that's very good for people to be
aware of how they be how they have come
become the creatures who they are I
think being curious about yourself is
very
necessary uh also to be curious in order
to be curious of other people when you
said about your mother and the incest
thing yeah
you'd realized as an adult much of your
work focused on incest and then you
turned to your mother and asked her if
there was an experience she had had and
She
fainted do you believe that there's a
part of you that knew no but I don't
know if my mother was incested I know
that my mother was very uptight about
sex and I wonder what happened to her
and her fainting INB means that I
triggered something but I don't know
what I triggered I would not jump to
conclusions that my mother was in victim
something happened to her but I don't
know what it is okay but the indicator
was that she was always uptight about
sex it wasn't that unbelievably UPS
about sex terrified about
sex
Y how many of the people that you
treated in your practice have you could
you trace their adult dysfunction back
to An Early Childhood
experience pretty much 90% let's say
yeah 90% but you know that's that's me
how I mean people with Autism or people
with
OCD don't come to see me MH that's so I
I have a very narrow filter in the way
of who comes to see me and what's the
Crux of what happened to them as a child
if you had to simplify it the Crux is uh
not being acknowledged and honored and
for who they were as kids that's the big
thing is you
uh they were unseen and people did
Terrible Things to them and nobody
seemed to bother to protect them when
you say Terrible Things Terrible Things
is being beaten up being sexually
molested having their bones broken what
if it was just
words also
words one of my patients mother said for
all the time oh you will never have
friends if people really get to know you
they will all reject you because it's Dr
ter PR that's pretty that's pretty good
who said
that well mother of Wonder people3 but
it would not be an unusual thing to say
people do terrible things to kids
intentionally and
unintentionally um automatically
automatically yeah is that hurt people
hurting people yeah no you see it in
supermarkets and parking L and stuff
like that yeah what' you see you see
people abusing their kids seeing
terrible things their
kids I guess it's difficult for parents
because they sometimes think well I've
got to raise a child that's not
dysfunctional so I've going to have to
punish them and I've G to have to
discipline them as a way to make sure
that they grow up to be healthy and
well-rounded yeah that's an interesting
cultural issue that um that is sort of
how my parents and grandparents
generation saw their kids and then
people who grew up in northern Europe
completely changed their attitude now
you go to jail if you hit your kids in
in Sweden for example I think me in
Holland also not in the US so people
have really changed their mind but in
the US when they talk about the the
downside of of physical punishment of
their kids often times particularly
black people will say I want to raise my
children knowing about right and wrong
and the Bible says I need to punish my
children and that's what I'm doing and
you should not subvert the teachings of
my children
church and they don't argue with that
because um at least not straight on I
grew up in a household where I was
punished physically in pretty
significant ways ways that I probably
could share because it's just quite you
know significant quite
horrendous and they are horrendous
stories actually yeah I was born in
Africa so I've got a African mother and
an English father
um it's funny because I look back on it
and I go and this is just me
rationalizing and hindsight I go I'm
happy that I had a home where there was
discipline because if I didn't have that
home then I wouldn't maybe have left the
city we're one of the few families that
actually left the city the small fairly
small town relatively small town to some
of the towns I live in now and went and
did a lot of things with my life and I
was I didn't get caught up in drugs like
some of my friends I I wasn't
dysfunctional and my mother couldn't
read or write as well so I feel somewhat
thankful but I'm doing I'm like
rationalizing in hindsight because it
somewhat ended up okay in certain
measures of my life in other areas of my
life there's dysfunction you know and
your perception may change really my
perception about my life and who I
became has has quite changed quite a bit
over time as as layers come open but
what you talk about that things were
predictable is very important my parents
also were
predictable which is enormously helpful
for at least you to anticipate to know
what you are supposed to do etc etc
chaos is a terrible thing I think that
point is really interesting because
although there was I was physically
punished a lot yeah um it was
predictable yeah so I knew that if I I
understood why I was being punished so I
kicked I was playing football in the
house and broke ornaments yeah or
something like that it was never
unpredictable right but something comes
to my mind as you're talking is that
same visit that my parents finally came
I had a three-year-old daughter at the
time we staying at the house and put my
parents on the first floor right next to
the main bathroom and then my
three-year-old daughter went to that
bathroom that was next to my parents
bedroom and my mother came out and
yelled at me said how dare she use our
bathroom you should punish
her and I almost did I had an immediate
impulse arm I should punish my my
three-year-old doing and I started to
walk to her and go oh my God I'm about I
feel like crying oh my God I feel I'm
about to reenact what my parents did to
me and I made a physician no Mom she is
allowed to use his bathroom and I said
the limit on my mom which is one a
transformative experience for me to
actually realize that I'm about to
repeat what was done to me which people
do routinely and I was about to beat my
daughter and I said
that's the end of the
story yeah it still causes you a lot of
emotion it's actually I'm surprised how
much emotion comes up talking about it
yeah yeah why do you think it it's so so
much emotion comes up when you talk
about that good question
um it's interesting
question
um because it allowed me to have a life
you know much of life is automatic but
you can make a choice to do things
differently you start owning yourself
and that's the moment I started to
own I'm responsible for my kids I'm
going to do follow what I think is right
it's really a moment of Liberation but
also a moment of
Separation like I will not be like
you it's tremendously hard to do that
because it's going against your right
and I think that's a big thing for all
of us to because we want to Bel long we
want to be member of a tribe and if you
do things
differently you lose your
tribe and you become a lonely Trav so
this is incredibly complex because uh
people want to be part of a tribe we
cannot do without a tribe and so the act
of actually leaving your tribe is a is a
very very
major pilgrimage make
yeah there's parts of me that manifest
sometimes and I understand that this is
the behavior that I would leared yeah
and I I think there's part of me that's
worried actually because I learn I grew
up in a home where phys you know
physical discipline was the response to
most kind of forms of unwanted behavior
that I'm worried that if I become a dad
that'll be my natural probably will be
yeah I don't want it to be you don't
have to follow it yeah your kid will
drive you crazy because kids do yeah and
at that point I think having kids is one
of the great learning experience in life
you
know we
all none of us knows but what we're
doing and then the kids teach us how
to to be very important teachers for how
do you deal with this because it's very
challenging yeah what did you learn from
y children oh I learned a lot from my
kids uh for one thing so my my first
born was a is a was uh just easy and
loving and luminous and pretty and
girly
uh and she now is gender ambiguous and
just divorced her husband to be with the
woman so that was completely transformed
in her case and to see go through that
Journey with her like wow wow wow wow
and my son was a neuro atypical child
very out of control much of the time um
many physical
reactions very bright
but
reactive staying in
bed only playing computer games and he
has grown up to be one of the most
loving
thoughtful adult parents
you can hope to meet so both my kids
have become become very different people
who I thought they were but they have a
very good relationship with both of them
even though I really don't quite
understand either of
them when we see dysfunctional behavior
in children I think one of the natural
reactions is to give them some kind of
medication or to attach some label to
them and say that they're broken in this
way how do you feel about that well that
is what saved my son because I am a
psychiatrist and I
know about how these labels are little
crutches that never quite capture what
somebody is suffering from and people
started want to do my put my son on
medications because but I was a
psychopharmacologist I really studi
drugs and what I can and cannot do and
it was very clear that they were not
helping him and I didn't have to submit
to Authority as most parents would do
and say oh my doctor says this and this
and this I say I'm a doctor I know about
brains and I know about kids and I don't
know what the hell is going with my kids
but he doesn't have bipolar disorder and
he is not respond going to respond to
lithium and so my both my kids were
major Inspirations for really exploring
what was good for them and I'm
particularly grateful for my son who was
such a really very scary kid in many
ways that my wife whom I'm now divorced
from um she was really great also in
terms of exploring what might be helpful
and so what I really got to also be
aware of is the issue of privilege that
I made enough money um that we could
spend a lot of time trying to find
things that would help my son if we had
lived in the housing
project I some would have been a
terrible Misfit but because we had were
able to give him so much support and
Care by
exploration uh that he actually found a
way of rearranging his his his mental
state him I mean just on that point
there's a startat I read that children
from low-income families are four times
more likely as the privately insured to
receive antis psychotic medicines that's
right that's that's that's
true 400% more likely to receive antis
psychotic medications if you that's very
big issue it's not really my of
expertise uh but you know giving drugs
to kids is potentially very dangerous
because you interfere with natural
processes of grain growth brain growth
yeah so if you give people medication
that changes certain chemicals in their
brain at the development of phase it may
actually change the way that that brain
gets formed and may not allow as
happened to my son who was able to
compens for many things and his brain
was able to learn how to react
differently if you suppress all that
your brain may not learn these new
adaptations you think we should be
looking at Social conditions before we
look at Social conditions physical
conditions movement
touch uh synchrony
music um has so so in our
world we got stuck in Western people are
allowed to do things they can do one
thing is they can what they call take a
swig if you feel bad you take them
alcohol and that makes you feel better
so that's part of our respected
tradition is taking a chemical to change
the way you feel and anybody who says
you should take that chemical nobody
ever say you're
crazy and the other thing that Western
people are very good is ying so it let
talk talk talk talk talk talk talk talk
and understand things and then I like to
tell people's story that the first time
we happen to Beijing in
1992 and China was still very poor and
deprived and miserable and coming back
from the cultural revolution and nobody
could talk about anything no nothing
happened on the mar no nothing happened
no gentleman Square didn't happen it
didn't happen and China was filled with
every Park then as now is filled with
people doing chiong and taii and I go
down into the park and do CH chiong with
the Chinese what's that Chong is it the
the Chinese Chinese movement of and I do
that with and I go like oh my God that's
how they survive by making this CH taii
movements which if you do in Boston you
people say you're crazy but in China you
cannot talk you can calm that body down
by the way you move and I became very
interested in how cultures about the
world World actually have very different
ways of helping people to regulate their
physiology and their synchronicity I
want to talk about all of that
specifically this idea of movement and
the role it plays in healing um just to
close off on the part about childhood
trauma yeah what why is it so important
for a child to grow up with a secure
attachment to a caregiver you become how
people see you you become how people see
you yeah so if you're a kid and most
people
most kids the parents find being cute or
you at least a grandparent say oh you're
so cute you're so lovely you're so sweet
and no kid is able to say I'm just
average look at building kids in the
world and I'm not any cure anybody else
no when a kids gets old you're really
cute that is your reality and if a kids
gets told you're really ugly and nasty
and mean that is becomes identity that's
you really become how people treat you
early on in your life and that's a very
big Legacy that I as
a as a therapist deal with is these
imprints of early experience which are
very difficult to
change imprints of early experience are
they
changeable yes that is the great news
and also the amazing news that even
though we know how to do some of that
we're not going there so you can heal
from your childhood trauma absolutely
everyone uh um that's my assumption when
I see people in your experience You'
you've dealt with patients your whole
life um your whole professional life how
many of those patients do you think were
healable I really think that if given a
chance and giving the
resources you can pretty much do
something for
everybody one of the other but but but
the problem is again we go back to where
we started before the microphone was on
is that our Focus these days is on
productivity and behavioral change and
not in how do we find out how to help
you all the things that I describe in my
book almost most of the things that I
describe in my book as being helpful and
that was 10 years ago I know some other
things since that time uh are
unconventional methods that don't don't
do not get practiced in mainstream
psychology Psychiatry because they need
to be productive
and they need to be cheap and whether
you get better or not doesn't matter are
you
cheap is the main
motivation I think the profit motive is
killing good practice your your book was
very interesting because um when I read
the cover and then I watched a video you
had made talking about the sort of six
uh sort of treatments and stuff that
exist within the body things like yoga
um you talk about theater and acting and
how that helps you to to get out of your
trauma the body keeps the
score this was a a pretty radical
approach to thinking through trauma and
it became a meme which is an interesting
thing to see well I I I use it in my
like everyday language with my partner
yeah and I've heard other people say the
body keeps the score the body keeps the
score when we're talking about how our
body is holding on to those y traumatic
memories traumatic things that have
happened to us for someone who has never
read your book and doesn't even
understand the like base premise here
what is the like base premise of your of
the title there it's really that trauma
is a visceral experience what does
visceral mean in your body heartbreak
and G bench you stiffen up
you surrender you lose your power you
tighten up that's really where trauma is
lived I kind of see it as two approaches
you can either go let's try and change
the mind which will then change the body
Downstream or you can say let's change
the body which will then change the mind
right is that you could but I do a lot
of CBT with my wife let's say yeah I
point out her irrational behavior and
that she should really see things from a
different angle and I should really see
things correctly and I really have much
obessed with
that and I'm a bit surprised that
psychology does things that most spouses
have failed in using very well this
sematic approach I've only recently
heard this term from my partner and she
says It's amazing And she's told me she
told me to speak to you on this podcast
because she says you know you'll really
help to change her opinion on this what
is the sematic approach to Healing
sematic approach is to really experience
what your body
feels and also uh allowing your body to
do things that it has been afraid to do
and to
explore how your body moves to the world
in some ways why women just to seem to
be so much better than at this stuff
than men because they're doing like plat
sure plates yoga these are all things
dancing these are things typically women
do more than men yeah yeah yeah yeah and
it seems women are just more in touch
with it yeah I think it's a intriguing
question because it's not exclusively
women of course men have always done in
armies and basic training and the
military and what's intriguing to me is
that uh you know when people join the
military they often times they're not
very well put together people and they
go through basic training and they
really March together they sing with
people and they climb barricades and
they go through uh composite physical
experience with other people at the end
of 12 weeks they feel competent and they
feel connected and they have found a
Band of Brothers how do they do it not
by yaking but by having very deep shared
physical experiences one of the
interesting things that you write about
which I found particularly interesting
because I saw little flashes of myself
in the words is you said I found that
the more traumas your patients have in
their background the more creative and
successful they often become
often often and we don't know how often
that is but get to meet quite a few of
them yeah yeah it's the people who have
had to struggle who often see new
possibilities and have no choice but to
discover new options that's true that's
true yeah but you know but those are the
people who manag to get into my practice
and the people who don't find those
Solutions don't have the wherewithal and
the capacity to make it into therapy
with me they might be outside with a
drug addiction getting drugs lying on
the streets etc etc and to large degree
I see that as as an issue of accident
you know this past year I visited a
program in Los Angeles called um Homeboy
Industries is a it's a program for
formerly
incarcerated largely Latin men who had
no fathers who have been
criminals and it's a spectacular program
where they honor they say what do you
need how we can to care you how can we
make sa safe place for you and I saw a
real treatment there St Quinton Hospital
uh s wenton prison famous prison in
California is now trauma based I use my
book as a PO texor and they transforming
people's lives by acknowledging the
reality of what they dealt with helping
people to be part of the healing system
working in groups working with
movement um like it's in Quinton they
have dancing classes I go like yeah
moving together with other people gives
you a sense of connection sense of
pleasure uh they they're really
beginning to understand you can do it at
the Harvard Hospital you wouldn't do the
whole with people you would dance with
people I think there's a bit of a joke
in the investment Community um that
says you'll get better returns if you
invest in someone an entrepreneur or
founder that is a little bit traumatized
and I actually think I if I I don't want
to misquote her but I had Barbara
Cochran who's a shark on Shark Tank in
the USA here on the show and one of the
things she said to me was with all of
her Investments the ones that tend to do
the best are those that have a little
bit of a trauma in their past and she
says because when they call me with a
problem they call me with the solution
attached versus people who have never
had trauma they call me and just tell me
the problem so they'll call me and say
listen Barbara this has happened and
this is what we're going to do about it
and that was her you know she said it in
a slightly humorous way but I wondered
if you thought there's any truth in this
idea that yeah I think that's again a
selection bias of people she works with
I know certainly plenty of people have
had plenty of people working for me uh
who who really get paralyzed in the face
of of challenges and who don't have a
solution and become very dependent on
giving getting the action so I think she
has an bit of an unusual sample actually
because I wondered if if you've had an
an anomalous early upbringing does that
make you an anomalous adult is does it
increase the probability that you become
a anomalous slightly different
absolutely and that can go everywhere
you you develop a mind and brain to fit
with that particular situation and if
that particular situation doesn't help
you need to find new Solutions and so
trauma and abuse really forces you to
find try to find other Solutions but
many of them are not successful
you is trauma a story in your brain no
trauma is a perception in your brain a
percep what's the difference so the
issue is something happens and your
brain and mind takes it in and then
makes an adaptation to that particular
event that depends on how old you are in
the circumstances it's very different
for different people give me an example
of a perception if you would beat me up
right now I'd go this guy is crazy and I
can call people and ruin your reputation
Etc if you're three if I'm 3 years old
and you start hitting me as a kid I
don't know what the hell to do about it
and I will likely think as probably I
did something wrong that I caused the
guy to beat me up and I'm a terrible
person and no wonder that he beat me up
because I'm a horrible creature and
that's what almost everybody who I know
who was beaten as a child uh that's the
internal understanding of it not when
you're eight years old or 15 years old
but when you're very young that becomes
your
experience because you're still forming
your perception of the world yeah yeah
and your brain creates a map of the
world very in very deep ways and so you
experiences form an internal V of the
world that that makes you expect certain
things at certain times so if I walk
into a room and I see a person who looks
like my old Uncle who he has to play
with I start Sil ling up to you because
you on the Deep level might be of that
very nice uncle that I once had I don't
know that but my brain is set to
interpret the world in a particular way
so one of the things most uh profound uh
research experience I had was purely
accidental we started to do warshock
tests on people what's that in BL test
so you saw some formless ink picture and
we showed it to people and we saw that
people had completely different
interpretations of what they projected
on that ink BL test and that really
brought home to me that we all are Liv
living in different
worlds and that our like a lot of the
Vietnam veterans I saw saw bloody
corpses or mutilated bodies in those
cards people had never been in combat
didn't see that uh Vape victims saw torn
vaginas and torn bodies other people
didn't see this so once that becomes
lodged into your perceptual system you
continue to interpret the world in that
particular way having to do with what
you have gone through in the past and an
ink block test for anyone that doesn't
know is basically just a piece of paper
with
random yeah but it's been analyzed on
about 100,000 people over the years so
there are certain patterns you can
detect in it yeah yeah I've never done
an ink blot test I feel like I should do
one I learned as much from my ink blot
test as I learned from our brain Imaging
uh but the brain Imaging is respectable
and the mind has sort of disappeared but
for example in our psychedelic research
I still very much hope to do in Blau
test because as Michael pollen says how
to change your minds but we not
measuring how people change their minds
how many people do you think I mean this
is maybe a ridiculous question but how
many people what percentage of people do
you think have trauma in some form how
you define it uh you know the figures
are a quarter of people get physically
abused one out of five people get
sexually abused one of eight kids
Witnesses V has being their
parents
uh etc etc so you know if I sit in a
room you know it's it's not a binary
issue it's not I you traum you didn't
get traumatized
but when I talk to a room of
professionals which I do a lot
I assume that at least half of the group
viscerally knows what trauma means and
what is trauma doing to my brain you
said you've done a lot of neuroimaging
yeah scans um if you if if I was
traumatized and you scanned my brain is
there something you could see not
necessarily I can see how uh your brain
may be different from other people's
brains I may take a particular
population you can average it out and
you can say oh there's a little more
activation of the Bara to gray a little
bit less of the white insulin so you see
see certain patterns of connectivity in
the brain but to some degree you know I
I think we we learn a lot about the
brain but we don't know much about the
brain and I think people tend to
overstate how much the brain pictures
can teach us uh you know it's I love the
Hubble's telescope or the web telescope
you know it's our brain is like a
universe and our technology is very very
inadequate to really know about all the
unbelievably con complex Connection in
brainers but we have learned a few
things in the last 20 years so how how
does trauma affect the brain it affects
the brain that you tend
to there's there's one part of your
brain that I call the Cockroach Center
of your brain the per accur gray that
lights up itself underneath the
everybody knows the word migler these
days there a part of your brain that
tells you that you're in danger when you
traumatized you're likely that that
little part of your brain way back in
the your brain stem is firing all the
time all the time you go like I'm in
danger I'm in danger I'm in danger and
so that's where it starts in a very
Elementary sensory level you don't know
what the danger is but you just feel
that you should be scared and then
there's certain um Parts other parts of
your brain
for example your insula which makes the
connection with your physical Sensations
and your body awareness that for many
people get shut down because trauma
basically experience of trauma is a
visile experience of heartbreak and God
venge and if you have a lot of that you
can learn to shut that part of your
brain down so you don't feel your body
so much anymore I you don't feel your
body so much you don't feel very alive
either but you don't feel so scared all
the time but it's likely that you will
want to take some drugs to make yourself
feel alive sometimes um stuff like that
yeah so the part of my brain you said
just under the amig around the amydala
below them below the amydala people that
are traumatized they have some kind of
dysfunction in that typically well the
dysfunction is that it keeps firing
keeps firing and how does that make feel
and then the mea so so there's a
constant sense of of subliminal dread is
that anxiety
anxiety is already to hire mental
functioning okay it's more Elementary
yeah it's like your dog shaking
like yeah my daughter has adopted a dog
was time and two years later the dog
still walks to my house you've adopted a
dog in it shakes in your house still
yeah yeah but still never quite
comfortable um and that's how many time
you meet are never quite comfortable so
when someone says they're triggered now
trigger is an higher level thing okay so
then the next level is indeed the
trigger that is in part mediated by the
amula is your M if your smoke detector
that tends to become hyp sensitive so
that minor things get blown up and a
minor thing that you may say to me I
take is the most insulting thing in the
world and so you're constantly triggered
by things and that makes makes you feel
like you you are doing terrible things
to me and it's not like I'm hyp
sensitive uh and when you have an off
day uh that is your issue and not my
issue no when you have an off day I feel
your off day and we start getting into
trouble together I've got a picture here
of what the brain looks like when the
brain smoke detector yeah yeah um goes
off is that what it looks like on the
brain when that is one particular guy
and nobody is exactly the same as
everybody else can you explain this to
me but basically but what you see here
is this is a guy who is
reliving uh terrible car accident he was
involved it and what you see here is
that the right posterior part of the
brain there's temporal paral Junction on
the right side of the brain uh fires and
that's the feeling part of your brain so
you go oh my God oh my God I'm terrified
but there's no cognition basically the
left side of the brain shuts down so
when you're in your trauma you don't
become you're not a reasonable person
you actually uh become a little bit of a
blubbering idiot all of us when we
really are angry upset and not very
articulate but we have a lot of
feelings and then the the piece that by
I show this is that as he is this guy is
Rel living his trauma these two parts of
your brain go
offline this is the dorsal Lal prefontal
cortex that's the part of the brain
that's the timekeeper of your brain and
so if something unpleasant happens
between us let's say uh I go oh it's not
a half hour and I'll be okay so let me
just put up with this but when you get
traumatized the timee keeper disappears
and this is all there is you lose your
sense of perspective and that is what
happen when your in your trauma you
don't know the difference between the
past and the present because the time
keeper of your brain goes offline and
whatever is you're feeling is real as
opposed to be feeling like a
memory so you get it yeah so people that
can't see it in this brain scan what I'm
basically seeing is the right side is
extremely activated the left side looks
like it's off off yeah and then there's
these two blanks um empty spaces that
aren't activated called the doors dorsal
lateral prefontal cortex soal pre part
of the system in the brain give you a
sense of time okay and as long as you
have a sense it's like little babies
only a sense of of time out whatever
happens happens totally then you see a
child slowly grow and they get a sense
of perspective it's happening right now
but tomorrow it will be different okay
so that's when I mean presumably that's
when you get anxiety right when you
start thinking about the future it is
about get having the
perspective of this is happening right
now right now I'm really scared but the
moment I go home the moment I call my
friend I'll feel better so that that you
you need to have the capacity
perspective and that perspective goes
offline when you're in your trauma and
you become a trauma Des person so this
particular person this brain scan that I
have here this guy was in a car accident
and the the triggered brain that I'm
looking at here is he was basically put
in a uh an m fmri i scanner and he was
intentionally triggered to see what
would happen in his brain exactly so he
was shown maybe a car accident or
something no no we specifically his car
oh you show him a picture of his what
did you see what did you hear what did
you smell what were you thinking very
specific sensory details okay so not
somebody else's sensory your sensory
details and the right side of his brain
was
illuminated yeah the light side of brain
became very active yeah but what got
inactivated was the eke keeper of his
brain so he could not lie there and say
oh I'm remembering what happened to me
yesterday he's Rel living what happened
yesterday instantly you feel like it's
happening right now and that's the
nature of trauma trauma is not a memory
it's a
reliving are you consciously reliving it
or is your subconscious reliving you
feel like it's happening right now with
all forms of trauma but not it's
happening right now but my feeling is
happening right now in my body you don't
know that the feelings actually belong
to the time that your dad used to beat
you it is now I feel the same way
because I disagree with you so I've been
triggered in the past and I felt that
sort of instant fight or flight response
because Something's Happened or whatever
it can and it's instantaneous so
although I don't feel like I'm back
there my body does feel like it's not
there and so people are confused about
it say oh you weiv the past no actually
you notw that you live the past because
the past is the present MH so you don't
think oh reminds me about the time that
my dad used to be beat me when I was
four years old no it feels like you are
beating me right
now and is there a way for this
particular gentleman here who's been
through that car crash to ever stop this
triggering yeah he've done quite well he
he did he did uh EMDR actually yeah I
movement decentralization and what was
his results he a all right guy he's he's
he's functioning he's fine he's no no
longer trauma Pres what's the most
radical Improvement you've seen in your
clinical practice oh really people
really coming to life people just saying
it's over give me the the the most the
best example the good example is the
videotape I showed people yesterday of a
woman again terrible car accident
freezing uh upset freaked out and then
three sessions later we got talk about
it she says yeah this shitty thing
happened to me uh I was in this car
accident and I jolted for it and my head
was F and boy that was terrible back
then but I no I have a granddaughter and
I drive my car to my granddaughter I'm
fine three sessions it took three
sessions yeah every we saw it in
psychedelic therapy all the time what
did you do in those three
sessions wiggle your fingers in front of
people's eyes I mean for for me for me
EMDR was really the gateway drug like um
soorry you know I've written three books
about PT they actually wrote the very
first book in which the word pgsd exists
in 84 or something uh but they didn't
know how to treat it so I'm a
world-renowned expert but I have no idea
how to treat it because people keep
relieving that trauma and they don't
know how to stop that and then somebody
starts telling me about EMDR and I don't
believe a word of it and they say just
you move your fingers in front of
people's eyes I mean you move your eye
from side to side as you relive the
trauma
and I go that's crazy everybody who
hears that's crazy and then people start
doing it and they show me how it works I
go like wow and people indeed
had a certain subsample of people we
studied indeed after a few session of
EMDR go like yeah that really sucked but
it's over it belongs to the Past not
happening right now you're telling me
that wiggling your fingers in front of
people's eyes can help heal that trauma
well and then of course we had to do a
little research which took us 15 years
to get enough funding to get do it to
see what happens when you move your eyes
back and forth and then we discover that
if you move your eyes back and forth as
you recall a traumatic experiences you
activate certain Pathways between the
temporo petal Junction which is your
sense of self and your insul your s your
body so your brain is able to say oh
this is what happened to me but that
happened to me in the past so these are
Pathways that makes it possible for your
brain to uh make that distinction and in
the research that's been done on this
yeah what does the what did the outcome
what was the conclusion in terms of it
efficacy oh in terms of uh in our
research um 78% of the people who had
adult trauma so so being assaulted or
raped
uh by a stranger 78% of them were
completely
cured but that's not the majority of
people we see because most people we see
have Early Childhood trauma which is
much more complicated to treat Early
Childhood trauma is much more sort of
stubborn and resistant to this treatment
yeah because your Early Childhood
experiences create who you
are Al so if you go
to fancy College when you're 18 you do
become identified with that college but
it doesn't radically change into a new
person I bet it becomes part of your
identity but if you grow up in a certain
family early on in your life you
actually become that you that the
imprint is very deep early on yeah so
it's called eye movement
desens and reprocessing treatment yeah
um I was just looking up some stats
about it it says it's been extensively
studied with evidence supporting its
efficacy across ious conditions with
PTSD a 2020 2014 Metro analysis of 26
randomized control trials found that
EMDR significantly reduced PD symptoms
with a large effect size depression a
2024 systemic review and Metro analysis
in encompassing 25 studies and more than
a thousand participants reported that it
alleviated depressive depressive
symptoms the same 2014 Met analysis
noted that EMDR led to significant
reductions in anxiety symptoms among
PTSD patients with a large effect uh and
finally a 2024 systemic review and
individual participation data meta
analysis concluded that EMDR is an
effective is as effective as other
psychological treatments for PTSD
achieving comparable symptom reduction
and remission
rates so can you show me how it works
can you do it on me I
could uh I'm G be can I move my chair of
course you can you're going to come
closer so can you bring to mind an
really to rather unpleasant experience
you have had not too long ago yeah and
when can you bring to mind what you saw
at that
point yeah can you remember what the
voice sounded like at that
point or whatever it was and sounds come
to
mind yeah uh do you remember what your
body felt like back
then yeah okay can you remember what you
were thinking or bring to mind what you
were
thinking yeah okay so how Vivid is your
feeling right now of recollecting it
make a six seven out of 10 okay so so
stay there now follow my finger with
with your eyes so look at my look at me
right
now take a deep
breath so what comes to your mind right
now as we doing
I feel calm
uhhuh yeah I just don't I feel calm okay
so when you go back to what you were
just
feeling what's it like now um
it's it's hard to Recall why I was
bothered it's the best way to describe
it that is the weird stuff you know why
is that is that just cuz why is that now
see that is that is what's so great
about his work we don't know the
linearity we don't know where the hell
the emotional imprint is gone now but it
is and you know of course if you bring
up something much worse than what you
had going to it takes it much longer and
a lot of other stuff comes up but what
somehow EMDR seems to do it creates new
associative processes in the
brain so let's say um first some people
did EMDR on
me something really very very nasty that
happened to me and I started off being
very upset and then during the EMDR I
know if that happened to you I had
images of sitting at my dining room
table as a kid and I had images of
playing in a playground in Primary
School something don't come in mind but
and then we stopped it and inde so yeah
that really sucked time to go on an
important part of this you did not tell
me what you were going through no um
because I'm suspicious of language
because language is always an
interactive process and if I would ask
you to tell me what happen you will
filter yourself because certain things
may be embarrassing or you don't want me
to know about it and so we we circumvent
this whole verbal process of your making
meaning out of it and we reorganize some
core ways in which your brain is
perceiving this so so you saw a little
bit of this very in minor way for me
when I first saw this I was blown away
by it and thought I need to study this
so when they quoted studies the main
study was done by me uh NIH funded that
but I was also the last time that
somebody got funded for ni for EMDR
breath work yeah what role did breath
Works become a really big topic my
partner runs a business called B breath
work hash ad um and she takes women away
she does these breath work Retreats all
around the world has a studio Etc um
what do you think of breath work as a
way to makes perfect
sense for one thing it's been used since
I'm time Memorial in certain cultures
have people people always Discover it no
in India people know
it not in Europe nobody knows about
breth work that's why these are
culturally dependent things I think uh
um the Clos us may know it I don't know
go out there see if people do
it and and so people are so conformist
to be approved of by their teachers and
their
peers that then when people do something
Innovative they tend to very quickly be
or they're cookie they're crazy that's
like um I really got into body work and
I've not not done breath work myself but
I hear about it from people and
I so it's perfectly legitimate to me um
but when I we do something new like I
was the first person who started yoga
for PDS and people go like putting your
butt in the air and twisting your spine
pessel for trauma like and said well
let's find out and so we did the study
and it turned out that yoga was very
effective for treatment of PTSD but but
the overwhelming reaction of my academic
colleagues was oh there he goes again
he's gone off the deep
end and now yoga is sort of pretty well
accepted as a so you yeah you can use
yoga to treat trauma you can no you
don't treat trauma you you you you yoga
to treat your relationship to your
body it's not the same thing but trauma
really distorts your relationship to
your body and uh what our research also
shows is that when you start doing yoga
certain brain areas that tend to get S
dampened by trauma come to life it's an
Adaptive thing because trauma is so
relived in physical physical experiences
Darwin said heartbreaking gut venge is
the visual Sensations and so if you're
heart constantly heartbroken gut vened
you try
to pull that down and so you lose
contact with your body
in as a defensive maneuver of feeling
overwhelmed by these physical Sensations
so I want to make sure understand this
so the insular part of the brain is the
part that links how we're what we do
with how we feel how we viscerally feel
yeah what's happening in our bodies okay
it link so it links how we're feeling in
our bodies to to what we know about
ourselves yeah the stories we have in
our head about ourselves so that's what
the insula does and Trauma interrupts
that which is what kind of dysfunction
on a day-to-day basis you are out of s
you you feel numbed out or disconnected
you don't feel alive you don't feel
connected you uh you can't feel pleasure
or you feel hyper sensitive and you feel
hypers sensitive because you talk about
the two sort of responses being
disconnection or
hypersensitivity there's always these
two contradictory things that coexist
remembering too much and remembering too
little feeling too much and feeling too
little uh there is no happy medum
you go from one extreme to another
you're agitated and num out at the same
time and and and I bet you know what
it's like because we all have been there
that we feel agitated and at the same
time we feel completely nothing at all
and there's almost no mind there and I
think is a very not uncommon Human
Experience and the in sealer playing a
ro the insul insul plays a big role in
that and many other P structures so if I
start doing yoga yeah what is that then
doing to that hypers sensitivity
disconnection yoga makes it possible for
you to
reconnect your senses in a way uh to to
feel what you feel and to make it safe
what you feel so as where you go to yoga
studio with a teacher with a nice voice
who really helps you to not take a deep
breath stretch out your arms feel that
Warrior 3 pose and then you start
feeling it and for many people do yoga
can be actually quite agitating scary
actually in a way for traumatized people
we see it all the time is that uh
something gets triggered and you start
getting upset just doing a simple down
dog let's say or certainly the the yoga
pose that all SE abused victims have
great trouble with is the happy baby
pose happy baby POS when you put your
feet in the air you lie on your back you
hold your toes and you spread
your your legs wide so your pelvis is up
against the air for most of us that's a
very pleasant part makes you relaxed if
you're a sexual abuse Survivor that's
going to trigger a lot of stuff really
yeah and you have to be very careful
doing
that because it's it's
triggering and so so because these
positions may be triggering you may hold
your body in a frozen position in order
not to trigger those feeling of sexual
abuse I was just thinking as you were
speaking about a friend of mine who um
tends to go through life with a sort of
crumpled up body they and they're low
self-esteem they're quite low confidence
I've never I don't know if they're
traumatized in any way can't pass
judgment on that but they started doing
yoga and it really has helped their
mental health in a profound way and I'm
just wondering what you think the link
is between someone who I'm just telling
you on the surface is like crumpled up
through their life but then go
absolutely I told you I was a sickly
child I was really sickly until I had
asked when I was 13
and and I think the most helpful thing I
ever did was roling roling is a very
intense form of massage ready so tear
your muscles from your fascia and I live
came to live in a new body I no longer
live Frozen in that body of this little
child who who almost died had a profound
effect of me as as much as anything I've
ever done why and how because you get
stuck in habits in a way trauma becomes
a habit my habit is that when I see a
strong guy in a room I get scared
hypothetical situation and so you have
habitual responses and part of what you
do therapy for is to get to realize your
habitual responses and become curious
about it like like you know whenever a
person like that comes to the room I
freeze and I sound like an idiot and and
your therapist says so what happens to
your body and how long have you felt
this way you feel this way when you were
six or three or eight and then at some
point people get a narrative that may
begin to explain it and that narrative
may say oh I was bullied by somebody and
that feeling comes back when I meet
somebody who reminds me of my bully and
then you go like um
have you ever tried martial
arts and see what it like be like for
you to actually learn to use your body
to fight
somebody and that's for example
treatment that I have never studied but
I was amazed how many of my close
colleagues who are very much into trauma
tell me at some point oh and now I have
to go to my martial arts
class and that is nobody sees that as a
legitimate way of dealing with what
they're dealing with but I think people
are doing their martial arts because
they have memories of being
victimized and it help gives me a vis
experience of my body can defend itself
my body I can use my body to take care
of myself and that's not an intellectual
process that's a visual
experience people often describe meeting
somebody and their body just being off y
so they say I met this person and my
body was just I just felt something in
my body y that they can't consciously
articulate but they just feel it in
their body this person's a bit off Y
what do you think they're describing
there I think they're describing two
things we pick up each other's energy
there's such a thing as the mirror
neuron system which hasn't received much
attention the past few years but I think
it's a very important
invention uh that you're I pick up your
energy and if let's say you're depressed
but you have a job to do so to talk with
me today it's very likely that I on some
level will pick up your depression and
it will affect our conversation I'm not
saying that it do that's a hypothetical
thing you know but we pick up each
other's energy and so we may be somebody
who is very angry but who's trying to
behave themselves and be very well but
you may pick up that anger and that's
really the very complicated stuff in
Psychotherapy am I picking up your your
energy or am I picking up my
energy and so if I feel uncomfortable in
your presence is that because you're
triggering something in me about my past
or am I picking something up about you
and that is the complexity of of our
interactions so yeah and from an
evolutionary standpoint um as you were
speaking I was thinking where where has
this come from you know this ability to
subconsciously just get a re for someone
and then form a pattern of okay this
type of person help me in the past and
20 years later I meet someone in the
street and I immediately feel the same
yeah is that just a survival thing what
you I think that makes perfect sense to
me like because we are primates uh
something that came up in your interview
with Trevor the degree to to the Deep
degree to which we're interconnected
creatures that we really don't exist as
individuals so we are meant to live
troops we're meant to be with other
people and so what is safe with other
people uh becomes a critical issue of
our survival the reason that that humans
have survived is not because of your
individual gifts or mine it's because we
can band together and build buildings
and airplanes and all stuff it's all
communal communal things so our it's
it's not Central in our science anymore
today but it's it's at the core if you
understand human beings we are a
collective bunch of creatures who
collectively create something and so
knowing how to do that and how to adjust
to each other is at the core of who we
are
yeah are we losing that a little bit you
know people are getting loner and loner
and more individualistic huge huge issue
screens as virtual realities is our
biggest challenge I
think yeah why uh because screens give
you a virtual reality of pleasure etc
etc but it's not real and is not a
product of your efforts of doing
something you get a cheap
reward but ordinarily takes a lot of
activity and so you get your little
dopamine rush and it
feels like you had experience but you
don't learn how to get along with other
people you don't learn that visual
reaction of pleasure of we are
friends what role does community and
social connection play in trauma
everything
critical and there's another thing that
is troublesome about the development of
our field namely in our generation
traumas who started with experiences
like mine working with combat
veterans I'm not a combat veteran I was
a conscien objector during the Vietnam
war um I don't think about the US Marine
Corps and so I couldn't I couldn't have
told people what it's like but they went
groups they talked to each other and
they learned about buts like to be a
combat veteran from each other and the
moment they made this connection with
each other they were become a band of
brothers and that's how people survive
trauma by bonding with other people it
seems that women are better at forming
those connections than men yeah I think
so I think so although no that's not
entirely true uh I learned a lot about
love for my combat veterans to some
degree I think most human beings don't
know what love is until you have know
what like to be in combat together with
other people creates an enormously deep
deep bond between people uh so I know
something about male love more from
working with combat R anything else when
you're have great danger guys are there
for each other they really protect each
other they really look after each
other what is it about that environment
that forms what you describing there as
real love and how do we it's danger the
natural instinct when you are in danger
you know you and I become much better
friends than we are if something bad
happened to us right now we start
clinging to each other is that because
we would probably need each other you
need each other yeah you need each other
and you count on each other and you have
each other's back and you're saying to
me I have your back um us making
commitment to each other is a very
profound Human Experience you don't get
from a screen well as also in an
individualistic Society you're almost
trained to not need anyone else but
yourself well but you know um I have
friends who went to
eatan uh so the definition for me of
many Englishmen is your mother hatte you
and send you off to buring school when
you're six years old and never looks
after you anymore and what helped my
friends who went to the the public
schools in England was
Sports enormously powerful uh people
felt really close to each other moving
together throwing balls together uh
fighting in the in the fields um that's
additionally has been the way that that
guys get close
together yeah that may bring a bell with
you somewhere of course yeah I was
thinking back to playing football
growing up and just you you yeah you're
one you're one unit effectively and if
there's a problem in this part of the
pitch then it's my problem too if you're
in trouble I I'm there to help you yeah
and I bet you you still make easy
contact with your friends when you
played football with 20 years ago no 30
years ago it's it's really interesting
because as you were talking I was
wondering how we can bring that back
into our lives in the modern world yeah
in a modern world where we live on
screens and exactly white walles alone
yeah you know the studies say that the
average I think it said something like
the average American has an average of
zero people that they feel they could
turn to in a time of Crisis which is
down from like three I think two decades
ago right I'll have a look I'll have
look at the stats I'll I'll pull up the
stats but the general idea of like us
being lonelier than than ever before and
how do we in a society that's like
designed to be lonely how do I on an
individual level fix that I think that's
the big challenge actually uh we have a
foundation now and the main thing that
be is in finding funding for projects
like that of how do you help people to
connect to each other be in sync with
each other we're very much into uh
people making music together do making
theater together creating projects
together that is who we are that is our
Glory as human beings this this
collaborative active physical creation
of things and that sort of not has not
been part of mental health we talk and
we give pills but but we don't really
connect people on a very deep
level is that is are you optimistic
about
this not after the last election no
really I'm very desperate after the
election yeah yeah yeah you're very
desperate after the last election why
because the last election was based on
othering you are different projection
you're
evil these immigrants come and killers
and they project their own uncom
discomfort themselves on people from
different religions and different skin
colors etc etc it's all projection of
people's own discomfort for themselves
and there's no honesty about the problem
is inside of me and not you yeah yeah so
I say you're not a fan of
trump Let's uh let's leave it at that
yeah no I think no obvious psychopath
who doesn't give a [__] about anybody
else are you able to point to anything
good about him and I've when I've had
people on this show that are pro Trump I
ask them the same questions I say can
you point about anything bad about him
because he's got family anybody who goes
to China and says I've been received
better than anybody else in Chinese
history is a
fool the guy's gone bankrupt any number
of times he says terrible things to
other people he insults other people all
the time I'm sure there's something good
about him Ivanka seems to have loved him
at some point
um he's a terrible person
going back to this point of trauma um
you said that there's three broad ways
to reverse the damage of trauma yeah so
if I came to you and I was a traumatized
person whatever that trauma might be
what would what would step one be if I
came to you for support with my trauma
Step One is tell me about yourself who
are you okay uh what do you value what
is
working what you want to work and what
gets in the way so it at start of really
language is terrible important I don't
make a list of how screwed up you
are I help to create a DSM at some for
in a very minor role uh but the DSM is
not a good way of starting off namely
how sick are you I first I want to know
who you are what is working what isn't
working what has helped you what hasn't
helped you what it gets in the way and
so we create a map together of who you
are uh
and to some degree who you are in
relationship with
me um and I would check a lot with
people about is this helping you um so I
don't I don't
prescribe at some point I may say well
have you thought about doing some
martial
arts uh would you be interested in going
to yoga studio but by large I give very
little advice but I help people to to
discover what is going on and where that
leads them in a
way and then once you've done that so
you find out that I had some early
traumatic experience how do you know
what treatment would you give me that is
a not of tricky thing and that is
something in my book I tried to do that
and I failed and in my new book I'm not
doing very much better I would see how
agitated you get how much can you stay
in focus and if I would see that
whenever a particular subject comes up I
see you're getting agitated or shut down
I would focus on that particular
experience and if I would see that you
are so chronically agitated unable to
focus I would say let's just do
something you should do some things that
help to calm your body your brain down
and I'd say when you're sort of overall
overwhelmed let's start with yoga or
chiong or whatever makes sense to you in
terms of how to move your body and i'
probably do neuro feedback what's neuro
feedback neuro feedback is you hook your
skull up to electrodes that can Harvest
underlying brain waves so you can
project your brain activity on a
computer screen and then you can play
computer games with your own brain waves
to uh to to organize your brain waves in
a way that you can be more focused and
pay more attention so I've got some uh a
graph I put on the screen for anybody
yeah watching and it shows five
different types of brain waves yeah
gamma brain waves which are very close
brain waves beta Less close Alpha Less
close Theta Less close and then Delta
which is when you're sort of sleeping
dreaming the waves are very very far
apart almost flat so looking at these
different types of brain waves if we
just categorize them from one being when
the brain waves are really tight and
close to five which is Delta when
they're really far apart
is one gamma is that like anxiety or
something no no anxiety is very focused
thinking okay fine but it depends on
where it is so the back of your brain is
supposed to have these slow waves
because your back of the brain is uh
dealing with the housekeeping of your
body the back of your brain tells you uh
you have to breathe a little bit more
you have to go to the bathroom you have
to eat uh uh you have
to about bodily regulation very large
part of your brain is about your body
regulation which get messed up in a
major way by trauma so um for example
When You Close Your
Eyes the V your brain is supposed to
develop nice slow waves to tell you I'm
feeling peaceful when you're traumatized
when ask you to close your eyes it is
very likely that the back of your brain
get will get agitated and create much
faster waves than you should and so you
get a sense of agitation the moment you
close your eyes um which is course Very
detrimental to your health so my job
then becomes how to train your brain so
that when you close your eyes your back
of your brain becomes very calm for
example as again it's not this is not
about trauma it's about brain
organization mean but so trauma leads
the brain organization but you don't
treat the trauma you treat the BR this
organization so for the average person
that comes to you what do you typically
end up
telling them to do the average person
some people these days I say I think it
would be very good for you to have a
psyched experience a psychedelic
experience and you found them yourself
telling people that more than more and
more recently well because I have done
the research now and uh our results were
really quite stunning much better than I
ever expected actually uh but I may tell
you no you're not ready for pschs I
think you should really do some neuro
feedback and some body practices to to
uh live more in your body before we
start blowing your mind open when you
say body practices we'll get on to
psychedelics but body practices these
are the things you talking about like
the yoga the martial arts um massages
massages any
massage well I happen to know some very
good body people okay who so if you if
you have been beaten up or molested uh
human touch tends to become very
complicated and so you may not feel
comfort by human touch and other humans
may not have a calming effect in your
body which is really what we supposed to
have in each other so learning to live
in a body that can be touched is quite
important is touch healing oh absolutely
you don't have kids yet no well you have
a girlfriend like you know yeah that's
true touches touches an elemental human
comfort thing you described these three
Broadways r versing trauma the top down
approach which is I guess talk therapy
yeah yeah talk is understanding Insight
Etc and you a fan of that no basically
uh I'm such a cerebral person so I'm
very suspicious of that piece that's you
know explaining things understanding
things is not my greatest handicap so um
so I tend to downplay that the
importance of that number two is taking
medications yeah which is to shut down
the body's alarms signals essentially
um are you a fan of that well that's how
I started life off as a saop
pharmacologist I did the first studies
ever on proac and Zoro for PTSD and so
they're not bad uh they can be helpful
to people and the third approach the
bottomup approach is allowing the body
to have experiences that contradict the
helplessness or rage or trauma yeah and
this is really what you focus on which
are called sematic therapies which
Target the body rather than the mind
yeah well it's a very important
piece and I I very much think that's a
very big missing piece in the therapy
mental health and medical field in
general to give people experiences of
connection and pleasure that is terribly
important but when I uh you know I wrote
this book before I got into psychedelic
therapies I would add another dimension
of um experiences that really blow your
mind that really allow you to have an
alternate reality experience
also in terms of energy there are so
many reasons why I'm a big matcha fan if
you don't already know by now and so
much so that I actually invested in the
UK's leading matcha company called
perfect Ted and one of my favorite
perfect Ted products is these delicious
matcha pouches that come in every flavor
from salted caramel to Peach flavor to
mint flavor to Berry flavor one of my
favorites is this vanilla flavor which
I'm going to make in just two seconds
you just take this mixer here get a
little bit of the powder pop it on top
of the shaker like that put the lid
on shake shake
shake delicious if you haven't tried
this yet you can find perfect Ted at
Tesco and Holland Barrett stores or
online where you can get 40% off with my
code diary 40 head to perfect ted.com
and put in code diary 40 to try this
delicious multi-flavored matcha now
highly recommend and if you do it please
tag me send me a message online
can the gym
help yeah but it tends to become a very
solitary experience also you sitting
your little treadmill watching Fox News
is not my ideal of trauma
treatment because I go to the gym I lift
weights and so I'm wondering if that's
if that's going to help me but that's
interesting like one of my close
colleagues former friend uh is a
weightlifter and she really is very
committed that waiting lifting weights
can be extremely helpful for trauma and
when she says that I'm sure that's true
for her and I wonder for how many other
people that's true the trouble is that
in their current system you're not going
to get the money to study weightlifting
for trauma even though you say it's
helpful for you my friend Mariah say
it's helpful I go like interesting let's
see for how many people it's helpful
yeah one of the ways I think about it is
actually a lot of the people that I've
interviewed that are
weightlifters yeah are bullied kids I
think about Mike who I had on the show
Chrissy Chell who I had on the show both
of them speak to even Lan Norton
actually I think he he speaks to some
early trauma as well um there kids that
were bullied in some form or had a
traumatic OT bringing um and they are
just massive now and I wonder you know
some people on the surface go or even li
King actually you're that way because
you're learning to defend yourself and
to build your self-esteem but there yeah
but that yes is not the right gesture
like oh you're just doing that because
yeah as if you're being dismissive
instead of saying good for you you're
doing that because you felt so helpless
and you want to build up your bu
interesting the my Association is that I
testified on behalf of many people were
abused by Catholic priests and almost to
a person they had become weightlifters
and
bodybuilders really clearly for the
reason that you also mentioned they were
just trying to bulk up to feel a sense
of agency and power and it didn't work
well enough for them so that alone
wasn't
enough I think you also needed to make a
connection with their helplessness
psychedelic therapy
yeah what's your view on psychedelic
therapy there's my own personal
background of course I'm a child of the
60s so uh I knew about
LSD and I think LSD for me at that time
I became a good medical student and
U came into culture stopped taking drugs
but my memory of taking LSD was very
positive and that at that time I got to
see that I'm a very small part of a very
large universe and that whatever
constructs I make in my mind are just
very small construct of a much larger
reality and over time I've had uh quite
a few of my friends have become very
very good scientists and they say the
same thing about her early LD
experiences of really truly having
opened up their minds to many
possibilities but then the culture
changed and they became illegal
criminalized and people stopped doing
that and then Rick doblin and Michael
mid Hofer started to open up the world
to psychedelics and they asked me about
it 50 years ago or something and I said
I think it's a great idea because when
you are traumatized you live in a very
constricted World basically the trauma
dominates your perceptions and regularly
sort of interferes with your exploring
larger realities and I think in theory
uh having a psychedelic experience and
open mind open experience would be very
helpful but I discouraged them from
doing it because they thought it was too
you'll never get by the regulatory
practices and then raised enough money
and asked me if I wanted to run the
Boston side of a very large study which
was eager to do very compared very good
Psychotherapy by people who I largely
had trained uh with Psychotherapy plus
MDMA and the results were stunning you
describe stunning that people I thought
that therapy would be very helpful in
many regards and it turned out that
therapy didn't make that much of a
difference a little bit
uh but the the MDMA
vastly uh changed the situation
and I wrote up that paper but I'm
actually sounded by how little that
paper gets quoted I I mainly focus on
the so-called secondary data of the
study which was how trauma change you
experience of
yourself and what we saw is that people
became much more aware of themselves
people had comp compassion for
themselves so people often times went
into that traumatic experience and had
the sense of time of oh my God this
happened to me that was so awful
happened to me personally also actually
on psychedelics of things coming up that
you were unaware of were so vivid deep
down inside and I feeling oh this poor
kid look what they went through he was
so little he was so small he couldn't
defend himself and so you get this very
deep sense of
self-compassion instead of the usual
response of self-hatred and self-blame
and then the next thing that we saw
happen all the time is and I was such a
beautiful kid and I had this alcoholic
violent father not talking about myself
but good uh and my poor dad he never got
to really enjoy this beautiful kid that
he had and they have compassion for the
perpetrator
like this St a compassion opening drug
which is what we have been looking for
in so many areas in life yeah you call
psychedelics a true Revolution yeah it
is yeah and you say it's a particular
Revolution because we don't know how it
works and I was looking at some stats
well we don't know how anything works
you know we just have a bunch of
hypothesis I was looking at some stats
that say um
MDMA therapy uh assisted which is an
important Point that's what we did yeah
assisted with a um
a therapist there or someone who's a
practitioner there a phase three
clinical trial reported that 67% of
participants who received MDMA assisted
therapy no longer met the PTSD criteria
compared to 30 odd perc yeah in the
placebo group which is a pretty drastic
change see that is the main paper that
on which I'm Al also an author gets
quoted but but I think is more important
not the PTSD did so well but people's
relationship to themselves
changed and my other paper describes
that actually but it doesn't get quoted
as much people can be focused on the
PTSD the real issue is do you love
yourself is your heart open are you open
to new experiences you know not do you
have this little list of symptoms in the
PTSD skill but are you a human being who
uh who embrace himself as a human being
so really interesting studies um around
treatment resistant depression as well
um one with cybin which is what people
know as magic mushrooms a treatment
resistant depression study in 2021
showed that a single dose of
cybin led to a significant reduction in
depression with effects lasting up to
six weeks for many participants 30% of
participants were in remission after
three weeks and a study by joh Johns
Hopkin univ University showed that 71%
of participants experienced a more than
50% reduction in symptoms after two
cybin sessions with 54% achieving
remission four weeks after the treatment
and the last study that I'll share is a
follow-up study found that nearly 60% of
participants maintained reductions in
depression symptoms one year after
treatment but these compounds aren't
even legal in America and the UK yet
that's right but ketamine is ketamine is
and we do a fair amount of ketamine is
just a therapy these days and I'm
intrigued that ketamine seems to have
similar effects to psilocybin and MDMA
even though they're completely different
chemical substances have you ever done a
a psychedelic drug yeah of course I as
part of my being Pi of this MDMA study I
had to do MDMA but for example um I
thought MDMA was ecstasy and gave put
you in place of pleasure uh as part of
my job I had to take MDMA myself and I
was ready for my magical experience I'd
never done it before and instead IID
always poo poo the issue of vicarious
trauma no it didn't really hurt me all
that much to see all the trauma the
world and while I was having my MDMA
experiences all the trauma TZ people's
pain that I had experienced over time
came back I lied there for eight hours
in agony going oh my God oh my God and I
got in touch with that hearing all these
trauma stories did have had a profound
effect on me and so I was really changed
by that experience I became a much
sadder but somewhat wiser man you became
a sad man absolutely I really felt all
the pain much more deeply yeah I was
able to sort of ball it off onto that
point and the ball came down and it was
quite
painful but what helped me is that my
guide Michael mofer when I told him how
I felt like a f
having have such pain Full Experience he
says yeah I know I used to be an
emergency room physician and one of my
psyched experiences all the patients who
died in my hands came to visit
me so that was helpful for me because it
made me make me feel like I had a
connection with another human being and
that through that context is terribly
important and that's really about much
of
the issue is are right now and I I think
we may very well lose that and that is
that uh clearly you need to do
psychedelics in very
safe uh conditions with a lot of support
and that the set and setting of
psychedelics which John's Hopkins study
also took very good care of all the
studies you mentioned did that is that
the context is terribly important and
while you're in these experiences the
environment needs to be completely
supportive and safe and be there for you
um and what our world profit driven
world is looking for is to give people
sakad give them one pill and go off by
yourself and then deal with it the
majority of the people in our study said
to us the study was over I couldn't have
done this if you guys hadn't been here
with with me did that experience with
psychedelics the MDMA experience you had
changed you yeah I think it did it made
me a much more U humble person and much
more compass to to people in general
yeah yeah just one dose well I've had
some other experiences also I've had a
number of other really painful
experiences on psychedelics uh and it
made me much more so you know people say
oh you how how your life gone I became
much more aware to what degree my quest
for understanding trauma had to do with
me than and I learned most of that after
age 70 actually really
yeah earlier on I asked if people could
heal from that trauma yeah have you
healed from
yours no healing is a complex word I
would say yes I'm I'm doing well as do
many people I've have worked with I I
know that's what I think the real power
of my book is that it's a very hopeful
book every chapter tells stories about
people go better and as much Sciences
have been able to do I've proven how
helpful EMDR can be I've proven how well
Young can be proven how well neur
feedback can do that's really has been
my mission is to not only be an advocate
but really say let's do the science and
see how El works and for
whom yeah what is the of all the things
that you've tried in your life to help
you with your own personal trauma what
are the things that have personally
helped you the
most there's another thing that's really
helped me and that got me into theater
is the issue of saak drama like a drama
um yeah it's a chapter in the book and
I've never done the science behind it
but I still love doing it and that is um
when you act out things in
threedimensional space it becomes a
completely different phenomenon if I
tell you let's put your family in this
room yeah um and I say where where you
choose somebody to play the role of your
dad where would you put your
dad you know where you would put your
dad I'd put my dad in this room right
now I'd put him there right there yeah
not there but there yeah yeah so that's
what the hell is happening here you know
precisely where you want him and if
somebody would play that role for you
the feelings of which your dad would
come up maybe even in your imagination
to some degree right now if you imagine
your dad there that's the first thing it
comes to your
mind well I put my dad at the head of
the table that we're at because he was
always at the head of the table in my
household he was always the one when
we're at a table he was in charge of us
eating what sort of reaction would you
have as you see him here
um It's Complicated because exactly yeah
it's complicated because one of the
reactions is
like one of the reactions I had is when
he sits there he's in charge yeah but
now as an adult I have this other
feeling which is like no I'm in charge
now cuz I'm the head of the table I'm
the head of my
so it's just this Authority thing of
like right yeah that would come up mhm
it doesn't come up abstractly but
concretely when he sing there it comes
up and you may actually that I'm the
boss now or I hate that you're being the
boss or something some feeling comes up
and what is striking is that for
everybody when they put the that virtual
person the room the feelings toward that
person become very Vivid and the overlap
is quite different from what the story
do people tell actually that that brings
up the threedimensional
and often times people have had harsh
and neglectful fathers and then but I
say at some point after you s do things
with him I may even say you want to hit
your
dad possibly I might
actually do that actually have you hit
your that put a pillow in front of you
have people hold but they feel it oh my
God if I could have done that would be
so great or how guilty I feel so you do
something virtually which you could
never do in your words and then I would
say would you like to pick somebody in
this room to play the role of the dad
that you always wanted the dad you
always wanted it and then you choose
somebody and I encourage you to see how
you would like that person to hold
you and when you have that you got you
usually have a very deep emotional
release and say oh my God if my dad
would have helped me like that when I
was three years older 5 years older 8
years old and I needed this my life
would have been completely different and
so you make a virtual new
reality with that is physical and
visceral with other people and that
memory of what it feels like can be very
profound and you're doing this in with a
group of people I do I do this about
four times year with a group of people
it's my favorite Clinic activity because
I'm always just so astounded by what
comes out of
it yeah uh it's almost role playing your
past and role playing but you really
because you work in three dimensional
space it feels much more real yeah and
so but but therapists usually they have
this hope that um if I'm respectful and
caring towards you I'll give you a
reparative and emotional experience uh
that will give you the feeling of what
it would have liked been like if you had
gotten that in the past and what my old
teacher about it said about it's a
mismatch I as an 80y old guy cannot give
you as a 30 something year old guy the
feeling of what it been like if your mom
would have loved you at age
three we cannot do that but in these
theatrical Enterprises in
three-dimensional space physical you do
get an imprint of oh that is what it
felt like that's what I was missing so
you it's a very powerful way of creating
a virtual
reality so the subject matter of
ADHD has become very popular in culture
in 2022 approximately 11% of children
Age 3 to 17 had been diagnosed with ADHD
up from 9% roughly in 2016 and in the UK
between 2000 and 200 18 ADHD diagnosis
in adults Rose 20 fold what with a
20-fold increase in medication
prescriptions among men aged 18 to 29
and that's from the nhr and in Australia
over the past decade ADHD medication has
surged nearly 300% with more than a 450%
increase among adults and a significant
rise among women what is going on here
see I I really see see that somewhat
differently from the way you guys talked
about it before and that is all these
things are on on a Continuum you don't I
you don't have PTSD or you have or you
have don't have ADHD or you don't have
ADHD these are no binary issues so this
capacity to focus to pay attention to be
flexible in your attention is is a
dimensional issue dimensional issue so
people some people have it better more
than others some people cannot sit still
at all and other people can sit still
under certain conditions other people
can so um it's not like you have ADHD or
not you may have some issues staying
focused or staying still or paying
attention and that may be very many
underlying issues it may be that um your
mom took some toxins while you were she
was pregnant with you it's possible that
it is in your genes um just about every
traumatized kids I've ever seen meth
criteria for ADHD because trauma really
messes up your capacity focus and
concentrate so this is not an entity it
is a fictitious entity it's not like
cancer of the
gallbladder is not
having astrocytoma in your brain and
these mental phenomena are networks of
complicated ways of organizing your mind
and our diagnostic system just sucks
when I spoke to Gabel mate he do you
know Gabel mate yeah sure yeah he he was
describing what ADHD was to me and he
said um he reviews it as a response to
Early Childhood stress and Trauma rather
than purely genetic or neurological well
but I wouldn't say that I'd say it could
be genetic it could be toxic it could be
trauma this is the surface
behavior of not being able to focus and
concentrate like my son certainly had
criter met criter with
ADHD I other than that he disappointed
me was not a particularly traumatized
kid um no he really had real
issues organically based but that he
outgrew also at some point so these
things are not stable these are
configuration that you can grow with
over time and they're not multi they're
multifactorial they're surface phenomena
because I was I was diagnosed with ADHD
but the
way other people that have ADHD have
just like drastically different yeah
symptoms to me like drastically
different like we're not the same people
at all we're close to the same bpark
like for example I'm really good at
focusing on something for quite a long
time if I'm interested whereas I often
hear people with certain types of ADHD
be very unfocused absolutely on things
yeah and so I I I have struggled with
understanding what it means to be
diagnosed with ADHD when there can be so
many types yeah that's right so almost
makes me feel that the label the
singular label which we share although
there's all these subtypes is
necessarily helping me to understand
myself in any way yeah I would really
you know everybody who who is serious
about it stuff knows that our diagnostic
system totally sucks really yeah but
just is a total artifact of us sitting
in a room 40 years ago making up little
list of diagnosis there's no scientific
validity to this actually PTSD is one of
the more scientifically reliable
diagnosis of all the diagnosis they're
just very primitive ways of categorizing
human mind and we know so much more and
we should move beyond that and everybody
who knows something about science knows
that we should move Beyond it but we are
not why I think we're not doing it
because our focus is not on helping
people our focus is on bonding
successful financially or financial
organizations you know I I I teach neuro
feedback and there's a chapter on neuro
feedback there and this serious research
on neuro feedback and we do neuro
feedback trainings and so the head of an
insurance company took a training with
me neuro feedback and he pulled me aside
he said best of course you know that as
a head of insurance company I'm not
interested in getting people better I'm
interested in having as many subscribers
to my b as I can you know if we really
went back to re being real doctors we
say how do I get you better what is
wrong with you and and we know so much
about Neuroscience these days about how
the brain organize information that it's
time to actually update ourself to
2024 and start thinking about networks
in the brain and what part of the brain
is connected with but and mental
functioning at different ages and what
kids understand at age three which is
different than age five and think in
terms of how well is your brain able to
filter out irrelevant
information how well is your brain able
to be still and quiet and how well are
you able to take on the task and
complete it how do I not raise a
traumatized kid Vel because I'm gonna
have kids probably quite soon
hopefully and I don't want to raise
traumatized kids um be sure to listen to
people in your environment don't raise
them by yourself I think raising a kid
by
yourself um you'll give the full brunt
of your own pathology leave on your kid
so it's very important for a kid to be
raised by a number of people so the kid
gets to say oh my dad is a little bit
reactive but my neighbor across the
street is much calmer and so the kid
gets to see multiple perspectives as all
of us idealize African villages as
people having many different parents who
look after you it takes a village it
takes a village I think kids need to be
really part of a large environment where
they can see their parents as safe
people but also flawed people and the
more nuclear you get the the harder it
gets to keep your pathology out of your
kids uh life actually so Community is
everything also in terms of raising a
child is there anything that you think
is healing towards trauma childhood
trauma all forms of trauma that we
haven't talked
about well the the critical issue is
that trauma is about being helpless and
not nobody coming to your
rescue and so it's very important to
have the experience that if you really
cannot do something or you're scared
that somebody comes to your help at this
point and you get an imprint that even
when I feel really bad somebody will
come and be there for me and that is
what many people
miss when you have a drunken parent so
we see this all the time in our practice
people have a violent parent usually the
father but not always um and then Mom or
Dad in my case more my dad than my mom
uh turns a blind
eye and doesn't say I'll take care of
you even though other parent is hurting
you and the
Betrayal of a parent to let the other
parent do terrible things to them and
not really say no you cannot do this to
my kid is a huge thing for many
people it's interesting
yeah this by being having Benders who do
not come to your help very big deal yeah
and the way to to recover from that is
to counteract it with adult information
yeah
it's um have life experience where
people come to your help and I think uh
being part of a sports team being part
of a theater group being part of a
musical group where people really feel
now it's your turn coming and you you
know you I think the the issue of
rhythmicity and synchronicity is really
at the core of our internal sense of
safety and belonging yeah vessel we have
a closing tradition on this podcast
where the last guest leaves a question
for the next guest not knowing who
they're leaving it for and the question
that's been left for you
is what do you believe is the question
that the audience have just had this
conversation are screaming down the
camera the question is where do I get
the help I
need I think that's really the big thing
because it is so hard it is such a
expiration Mo almost everybody who I
know who have found a way of getting
better has been an
Explorer and uh and quite an accidental
Explorer like and then I found this um
kavadi teacher and then I found this
yoga teacher and then I found this
psycho dramatist and then it's but it's
very largely
accidental that I think the
mainstream is not on the right
road so you have to discover what work
free you and that's a very tough one
because you'll feel stupid and ignorant
and if something is not helping you it
is very hard for you to S to for
yourself this not helping me because
this person is not helping me but than
blaming yourself there must be something
wrong with me that is not helpful for
you and making that distinction is a
very tough one I know it from my
experience I've been in treatments for
long periods of time despite all my
qualifications where it took me a long
time to go like I'm wasting my time and
my money and if you don't have my
education and background it's even
harder to say I'm wasting my time my
money yeah it was interesting as you
were speaking I was reflecting on the
things that I was thinking a lot about
this idea of community and you're
talking about how being in sports teams
helps and I was thinking about in my
adult life in some of my most difficult
times when things were difficult and I
went and played football or some kind of
sports with a group of people I just
felt radically better and I think
actually I put it down to oh well
because you know I did some exercise but
actually think there's something deeper
oh no it's that connection passing that
ball somebody catching it you know it
made a difference playing music my
little piece of music that I made made a
better place being in a theater group um
being a cook you know there's many
dimensions long which you can do that
many of us especially I think adult men
don't have these kind of things I mean
we go to watch Manchester United play or
something like that we go to football
ground but maybe we need to fill our
lives with more of these things yeah we
do I think and we should say it to
ourselves because I need to do more of
that also yeah we well we kind of just
assume that Society is designed in such
a way where it'll give us what we need
yeah yeah but in fact if you think about
the loneliness stats and the way things
even like the pub is less pubs on the
High Street shutting down across the UK
and less community centers the church is
a good example is I grew up singing all
the time and people around me May me
sing in schools and now then we got
iPods aren't we lucky we get iPods and
then before too long you stop singing
and you start listening to your iPod MH
and so technology has has been
unbelievable blessing and what a curse
it has been for us yeah yeah Dr Bessel
Vander Co thank you so much for the work
that you do um as I said to you before
we started recording you have so many
extreme
passionate followers Advocates fans
because your work has made them
completely rethink and understand their
lived experience and also giving them a
much more optimistic hopeful cure uh or
treatment for their lived experience one
of which is my partner who when she
she's been telling me for three years to
get you on this show and was so
extremely excited I think it's the
happiest I've made her in the last three
years when I said that you'd agreed to
come on
genuinely um but that for me is such a a
personal and sort ofal
um sign of evidence of the impact you
have on people it is tremendous so thank
you on behalf of all of those people for
the work that you do and please do keep
on doing it because it's opening all of
our eyes and you too thank you I love
your show I appreciate you thank
you isn't this cool every single
conversation I have here on the DI of
CEO at the very end of it you'll know I
ask the guest to leave a question in the
Diary of a CEO and what we've done is
we've turned every single question
written in the diary a CEO into these
conversation cards that you can play at
home so you've got every guest we've
ever had their question and on the back
of it if you scan that QR code you get
to watch the person who answered that
question we're finally revealing all of
the questions and the people that
answered the question the brand new
version two updated conversation cards
are out right now at the conversation
cards.com
they've sold out twice instantaneously
so if you are interested in getting hold
of some limited edition conversation
cards I really really recommend acting
quickly
[Music]
h